
![OASIS Logo](http://docs.oasis-open.org/templates/OASISLogo-v2.0.jpg)
-------

# Event Stream Extensions for AMQP Version 1.0

## Working Draft 01

## 22 June 2020

#### Technical Committee:
[OASIS Advanced Message Queuing Protocol (AMQP)
TC](https://www.oasis-open.org/committees/amqp/)

#### Chairs:
Rob Godfrey (rgodfrey@redhat.com), [Red Hat](http://www.redhat.com/) \
Clemens Vasters (clemensv@microsoft.com), [Microsoft](http://www.microsoft.com/)

#### Editor:
Clemens Vasters (clemensv@microsoft.com), [Microsoft](http://www.microsoft.com/)

#### Related work:

This specification is related to:
* _OASIS Advanced Message Queuing Protocol (AMQP) Version 1.0 Part 0: Overview_.
  Edited by Robert Godfrey, David Ingham, and Rafael Schloming. Latest version:
  http://docs.oasis-open.org/amqp/core/v1.0/amqp-core-overview-v1.0.html.

#### Abstract:
This specification defines a set of AMQP extensions for interaction with event
stream engines, including annotations for partition selection and filter
definitions for indicating offsets into an extension stream to which a link
shall be attached.

#### Status:
This document was last revised or approved by the OASIS Advanced Message Queuing
Protocol (AMQP) TC on the above date. The level of approval is also listed
above. Check the "Latest version" location noted above for possible later
revisions of this document. Any other numbered Versions and other technical work
produced by the Technical Committee (TC) are listed at
https://www.oasis-open.org/committees/tc_home.php?wg_abbrev=amqp#technical.

TC members should send comments on this specification to the TC's email list.
Others should send comments to the TC's public comment list, after subscribing
to it by following the instructions at the "Send A Comment" button on the TC's
web page at https://www.oasis-open.org/committees/amqp/.

This specification is provided under the [RF on
RAND](https://www.oasis-open.org/policies-guidelines/ipr#RF-on-RAND-Mode) Mode
of the [OASIS IPR Policy](https://www.oasis-open.org/policies-guidelines/ipr),
the mode chosen when the Technical Committee was established. For information on
whether any patents have been disclosed that may be essential to implementing
this specification, and any offers of patent licensing terms, please refer to
the Intellectual Property Rights section of the TC's web page
([https://www.oasis-open.org/committees/amqp/ipr.php](https://www.oasis-open.org/committees/amqp/ipr.php)).

Note that any machine-readable content ([Computer Language
Definitions](https://www.oasis-open.org/policies-guidelines/tc-process#wpComponentsCompLang))
declared Normative for this Work Product is provided in separate plain text
files. In the event of a discrepancy between any such plain text file and
display content in the Work Product's prose narrative document(s), the content
in the separate plain text file prevails.

#### URI patterns:
Initial publication URI:  
https://docs.oasis-open.org/amqp/event-streams/v1.0/csprd01/event-streams-v1.0-csprd01.html

Permanent "Latest version" URI:  
https://docs.oasis-open.org/amqp/event-streams/v1.0/event-streams-v1.0.html

(Note: Publication URIs are managed by OASIS TC Administration; please don't
modify.)

#### Citation format:
When referencing this specification the following citation format should be
used:

**[Event-Streams-v1.0]**

_Event Stream Extensions for AMQP Version 1.0_. Edited by Clemens Vasters. 03
June 2020. Working Draft 1.
https://docs.oasis-open.org/amqp/event-streams/v1.0/csprd01/event-streams-v1.0-wd01.html.
Latest version:
https://docs.oasis-open.org/amqp/event-streams/v1.0/event-streams-v1.0.html.

-------

## Notices
Copyright Â© OASIS Open 2020. All Rights Reserved.

All capitalized terms in the following text have the meanings assigned to them
in the OASIS Intellectual Property Rights Policy (the "OASIS IPR Policy"). The
full [Policy](https://www.oasis-open.org/policies-guidelines/ipr) may be found
at the OASIS website.

This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to others, and
derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it or assist in its
implementation may be prepared, copied, published, and distributed, in whole or
in part, without restriction of any kind, provided that the above copyright
notice and this section are included on all such copies and derivative works.
However, this document itself may not be modified in any way, including by
removing the copyright notice or references to OASIS, except as needed for the
purpose of developing any document or deliverable produced by an OASIS Technical
Committee (in which case the rules applicable to copyrights, as set forth in the
OASIS IPR Policy, must be followed) or as required to translate it into
languages other than English.

The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be revoked by
OASIS or its successors or assigns.

This document and the information contained herein is provided on an "AS IS"
basis and OASIS DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE
ANY OWNERSHIP RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR
A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

OASIS requests that any OASIS Party or any other party that believes it has
patent claims that would necessarily be infringed by implementations of this
OASIS Committee Specification or OASIS Standard, to notify OASIS TC
Administrator and provide an indication of its willingness to grant patent
licenses to such patent claims in a manner consistent with the IPR Mode of the
OASIS Technical Committee that produced this specification.

OASIS invites any party to contact the OASIS TC Administrator if it is aware of
a claim of ownership of any patent claims that would necessarily be infringed by
implementations of this specification by a patent holder that is not willing to
provide a license to such patent claims in a manner consistent with the IPR Mode
of the OASIS Technical Committee that produced this specification. OASIS may
include such claims on its website, but disclaims any obligation to do so.

OASIS takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any intellectual
property or other rights that might be claimed to pertain to the implementation
or use of the technology described in this document or the extent to which any
license under such rights might or might not be available; neither does it
represent that it has made any effort to identify any such rights. Information
on OASIS' procedures with respect to rights in any document or deliverable
produced by an OASIS Technical Committee can be found on the OASIS website.
Copies of claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances of
licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made to obtain a
general license or permission for the use of such proprietary rights by
implementers or users of this OASIS Committee Specification or OASIS Standard,
can be obtained from the OASIS TC Administrator. OASIS makes no representation
that any information or list of intellectual property rights will at any time be
complete, or that any claims in such list are, in fact, Essential Claims.

The name "OASIS" is a trademark of [OASIS](https://www.oasis-open.org/), the
owner and developer of this specification, and should be used only to refer to
the organization and its official outputs. OASIS welcomes reference to, and
implementation and use of, specifications, while reserving the right to enforce
its marks against misleading uses. Please see
https://www.oasis-open.org/policies-guidelines/trademark for above guidance.

-------

# Table of Contents

[[TOC will be inserted here]]

-------

# 1 Introduction

This specification defines a set of AMQP extensions for interaction with event
stream engines, including annotations for partition selection and filter
definitions for indicating offsets into an extension stream to which a link
shall be attached.

In the context of this specification, the term "event stream engine" describes a
particular archetype of AMQP node that manages sequences of events (messages) in
an ordered log structure.

Event logs differ from queue-like structures in that they do not track message
delivery state across competing receivers. The message delivery state is instead
tracked for each link at its terminus. When attaching a `receive` AMQP link, the
receiver MAY indicate an initial offset into the retained event log. The
delivery of events then progresses in log order from that initial offset to more
recently added events. Omitting the offset results in delivery of events added
after attaching the link.

Event stream engines conforming to this specification MAY implement any of the
capabilities defined here and they MUST implement the default behaviors defined
here when those capabilities are not explicitly used.

It is not in scope for this specification to define how an event stream consumer
might handle persistence and failover of initial stream offsets that the
consumer wants to track across multiple interactions with the event stream log.
Once an AMQP link is established with an initial offset, the event log node's
AMQP link terminus will keep track of the consumer offsets and delivery state
while the link is active. Each message delivered to a consumer carries a
delivery annotation (`event-streams-offset`) that the consumer can hold on to
and use as the initial offset for a new link when it wants to resume suspended
processing. 

## 1.1 IPR Policy
This specification is provided under the [RF on
RAND](https://www.oasis-open.org/policies-guidelines/ipr#RF-on-RAND-Mode) Mode
of the [OASIS IPR Policy](https://www.oasis-open.org/policies-guidelines/ipr),
the mode chosen when the Technical Committee was established. For information on
whether any patents have been disclosed that may be essential to implementing
this specification, and any offers of patent licensing terms, please refer to
the Intellectual Property Rights section of the TC's web page
([https://www.oasis-open.org/committees/amqp/ipr.php](https://www.oasis-open.org/committees/amqp/ipr.php)).

## 1.2 Terminology
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD",
"SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
document are to be interpreted as described in BCP 14 [[RFC2119](#rfc2119)] and
[[RFC8174](#rfc8174)] when, and only when, they appear in all capitals, as shown
here.

## 1.3 Normative References

###### [AMQP-v1.0]
_OASIS Advanced Message Queuing Protocol (AMQP) Version 1.0 Part 0: Overview_.
Edited by Robert Godfrey, David Ingham, and Rafael Schloming. Latest version:
http://docs.oasis-open.org/amqp/core/v1.0/amqp-core-overview-v1.0.html.

###### [FILTEX-v1.0]
_AMQP Filter Expressions Version 1.0_.
Edited by Clemens Vasters. Latest version:
http://docs.oasis-open.org/amqp/filtex/v1.0/filtex-v1.0.docx
###### [RFC2119]
Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement Levels", BCP 14,
RFC 2119, DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119.
###### [RFC8174]
Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC 2119 Key Words", BCP 14,
RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174, May 2017,
http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8174.

## 1.4 Non-Normative References

###### [RFC3552]
Rescorla, E. and B. Korver, "Guidelines for Writing RFC Text on Security
Considerations", BCP 72, RFC 3552, DOI 10.17487/RFC3552, July 2003,
https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3552.

# 2 Definitions

The following terminology is used in this specification to clarify roles. These
definitions are narrower than their use in the core AMQP specification.

- `event stream engine` is a software infrastructure managing one or more event
  logs.
- `event log` maintains a sequence of events.
- `partition` is a subdivision of an `event log`.
- `event log node` refers to the AMQP node where links of senders and receivers
  attach.
- `producer` is the sender of events into the event log.
- `consumer` is the receiver of events from the event log.
- `consumer group` is a named group of consumers that coordinate consumption of
  events across multiple partitions.

# 3 Capabilities and Default Behaviors 

## 3.1 Connection and Link Capabilities

On connection establishment, the event log node MUST indicate its support of
this specification through the exchange of a connection capability (see Section
2.7.1, [AMQP](#amqp-v10)). The capability allows for the consumer or producer to detect
whether extensions as defined in this specification are understood and may be
used.

| Capability Name         | Definition
| ------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------- |
| AMQP_EVENT_STREAMS_V1_0 | If present in the offered-capabilities field of the open frame, the sender of the open supports the use of event streams extensions. |

## 3.2 Default Behaviors

This specification does not modify or override any rules of the core AMQP 1.0
specification.

Even with the capability being announced at the connection level, all additional
behaviors defined here are optional, which means that a producer or consumer
MUST be able to successfully interact with a conforming event log implementation
just as with any regular AMQP node, for instance:

* Producers and consumers that do not choose a partition on a partitioned event
  log are either assigned a partition by the event log node, or their links are
  left partition-agnostic.
* Producers are not required to annotate events with partition hints, even on
  partition-agnostic links. The event log node chooses the partition in absence
  of such hints.
* Consumers are not required to provide offset filter information. If no filter
  is provided, the consumer is eligible to receive events accepted by the event
  log node after the link was attached.
* Consumers can rely on all existing AMQP mechanisms for delivery-state tracking
  provided by the AMQP source terminus of the event log node. This means that
  after attaching a link, the consumer is not required to keep track of offsets
  for initiating further transfers while the link exists. The source might even
  offer link durability [(AMQP 1.0, 3.5.5)](#amqp-v10) with full recovery of
  unsettled state in the case of disconnects.

# 4 Partition support

An event log maintains a sequence of events. An event log MAY be split into
multiple parallel partitions that are reachable under the same network address,
or the responsibility for maintaining an event log might also be shared across
multiple AMQP containers/nodes that each have a separate network address and are
each responsible for one or more partitions of the event log.

Producers and consumers attach to the event log via AMQP links. Those links MAY
be bound to one, specific partition (partition-bound) or they MAY be
partition-agnostic. On partition-agnostic links, producers MAY provide
transfer-level hints for which partition the transfer ought to be routed to.

This model allows for a range of negotiation options for how consumers are
affiliated with partitions:

* Producer and consumers choose partitions on their own
* Producer and consumers are assigned partitions by the event log node
* Producer and consumers are partition-agnostic and can send/receive from any
  partition

The model composes with AMQP link-level redirects as defined in [AMQP 1.0,
2.8.18](#amqp-v10). With link-level redirects, the event log node MAY refuse to
attach a link, but rather point to a different AMQP container where the
requested or assigned partition is available.

If the event log assigns partition-bound links to consumers and wants to
renegotiate those assignments, it MAY gracefully close some or all attached
links and the respective producer or consumer SHOULD then attempt to establish a
new link.

Whether the event log node assigns partition-bound or partition-agnostic links
MAY be a configurable implementation choice. Partition-bound links provide the
consumer with the assurance that all transfers belong to the given partition,
which is desireable when the partitioning model extends into resources beyond
the event log.

The binding of a producer or consumer to a partition MAY be negotiated using link
properties when the link is being attached. A consumer or producer MAY request
for the link to be bound to a particular partition and the responding event log
node MAY also bind the link to a partition if no binding has been requested. If
the event log node is not willing grant the request for binding to a specific
partition, it MUST detach the link.

Partition identifiers are opaque to consumers and producers and of type
`symbol`. Consumers and producers learn about an event log node's available
partitions and their identifiers using a [runtime
information](#6-runtime-information) request.

## 4.1 Binding producer links

A producer MAY request for the 'send' link to be bound to a specific partition
using the
[`event-streams-partition`](#461-event-streams-partition-link-property) link
property. 

If the requested partition does not exist or if the event log node denies the
request, attaching the link MUST be rejected by the event log node.

The event log node MAY bind the link a partition when none has been requested by
the producer.

If the link becomes partition-bound, the event log node MUST set the
[`event-streams-partition`](#461-event-streams-partition-link-property) link
property to the bound partition.

## 4.2 Partition annotations in producer transfers

If a `send` link is partition-agnostic, the sender MAY provide partition-related
hints to the `event log node` with the
[`event-streams-target-partition`](#465-event-streams-target-partition-delivery-annotation)
delivery annotation or the
[`event-streams-group-key`](#466-event-streams-group-key-message-annotation)
message annotation.

If the `event-streams-target-partition` delivery annotation is added to a
transfer on a partition-bound link, its value MUST match the `event-streams-partition`
link property's value. Otherwise, the transfer MUST be rejected.

## 4.3 Binding Consumer Links

A consumer MAY request for the 'receive' link to be bound to a specific
partition using the
[`event-streams-partition`](#461-event-streams-partition-link-property) link
property.

If the requested partition does not exist or if the event log node denies the
request, attaching the link MUST be rejected by the event log node.

The event log node MAY bind the link a partition when none has been requested by
the consumer.

If the link becomes partition-bound, the event log node MUST set the
[`event-streams-partition`](#461-event-streams-partition-link-property) link
property to the bound partition.

## 4.4 Partition annotations in consumer transfers

The
[`event-streams-source-partition`](#464-event-streams-source-partition-delivery-annotation)
delivery annotation MUST be added to all transfers to consumers made over
partition-agnostic links.

The annotation is OPTIONAL for transfers over partition-bound links, and if
present, its value MUST be equal to the `event-streams-partition` link property
value. Otherwise, the transfer MUST be rejected.

## 4.5 Consumer groups

In scenarios where a group of multiple concurrent event consumers want to
receive mutually exclusive subsets of events from a partitioned event log, it is
desireable to restrict each partition to one (the "owning") receiver from the
group, and for event consumers to shift ownership of the partition dynamically.
Consumers might also want to use an external consensus mechanism to agree on
which event processor owns which partition, rather than have the event log
engine coordinate the assignments.  

This specification does not prescribe any algorithm or strategy for reaching
consensus on ownership of partitions amongst a group of consumers, but it
provides mechanisms for realizing their outcomes.

A consumer link MAY be bound to a consumer group by setting the
[`event-streams-consumer-group`](#462-event-streams-consumer-group-link-property)
link property to the name of the group during attach.

The consumer group MAY be dynamically created during link attach or MAY require
for there to be a such named pre-configured entity inside of event log node, in
which case attaching the link MAY fail if such an entity does not exist.

The event log node MUST NOT assign a consumer group if the consumer does not
request such a binding. Links that are bound to consumer groups MUST also be
bound to a partition; they cannot be partition-agnostic.

The selection and binding of a partition to the consumer within a given consumer
group follows the negotiation model explained earlier in this section.

If consumer groups are being used, the event log node MUST allow at most one
active 'receive' link for each combination of partition and consumer group.

### 4.5.1 Event log node-assigned partition ownership

If the consumer attaches a link scoped to a consumer group without specifying a
partition, the event log node MAY bind a partition to the link as described in
[4.3](#43-binding-consumer-links).

If the event log node manages 10 partitions and there are 12 candidate consumers
trying to establish links, 2 of those consumers might be denied access with a
`detach-forced` error since there are no partitions left to assign. Once a
partition-bound link closes, the respective partition is again available for
assignment. If all partitions are assigned, the event log node MAY choose not to
deny attaching the link outright, but keep further incoming attach requests
pending and complete those only once a partition becomes available for
assignment. 

If the event log node later wants to force renegotiation of partition bindings
amongst a consumer group, it SHOULD gracefully close all partition-bound links
and the respective consumers SHOULD attempt to establish a new link, again
without specifying a partition.

The event log node MAY also attach consumer group links without binding them to
a specific partition, allowing for multiple partitions to be associated with a
link and for those binding to change dynamically without having to reestablish
the link.

### 4.5.2 Consumer-negotiated partition ownership

To allow consumers to negotiate partition ownership using an external consensus
algorithm that does not establish transparent communication amongst the group of
consumers, new assignments of consumers to partitions within the group need to
be able to break the links of existing assignments.

For instance, if the consensus algorithm for ownership of a partition were based
on a expiring lease on some external object and a competing consumer were to
acquire that lease upon expiration, the new owner ought to be able to promptly
take ownership of the partition, without asking for the previous owner's
explicit cooperation.

To facilitate this, for each combination of partition and consumer group, the
event log node maintains a `ulong`-valued `epoch` counter, which is seeded with
the value zero and is returned in the `event-streams-epoch` link property to the
receiver during a successful attempt to attach.

Any subsequent attempt to attach a link to the same combination of partition and
consumer group of an already active link MUST be rejected UNLESS the newly
attaching receiver provides an epoch counter greater than the current epoch
counter value, expressed using the `event-streams-epoch` link property in attach.

If the epoch counter is provided and greater than the current epoch value, any
existing link for the given partition and consumer group is closed by the node,
the new link is attached, and the new epoch counter value is recorded.

Whenever the link for a partition within a group is closed by the receiver and
no links remain, the respective epoch counter MAY be reset to zero.  

### 4.6. Property definitions

#### 4.6.1 event-streams-partition link property

The `event-streams-partition` link property is a `symbol` value and describes
the partition to which the link is bound.

When set by the producer or consumer, the property value is a request for the
link to be bound to the given partition. When set by the event log node, the
value reflects the effective association.

When not set on the negotiated link, the link is partition-agnostic.

### 4.6.2 event-streams-consumer-group link property

The `event-streams-consumer-group` link property is a `string` value that
identifies a group of consumers and provides a scope for the epoch counter.

An implementation MAY require for the group identifier to correspond to a
configured item on the event stream engine and otherwise refuse to attach the
link.

A negotiated link carrying this property MUST be partition-bound.

### 4.6.3 event-streams-epoch link property

The `event-streams-epoch` link property is a `long` integer value and describes
the ownership epoch counter for the link relative to the consumer group and
while at least one link is attached to the partition within the given consumer
group.

If no link is attached to node for the given partition and group, the epoch
counter MAY be reset to zero.

#### 4.6.4 event-streams-source-partition delivery annotation

The `event-streams-source-partition` delivery annotation is a `symbol` value and
describes the partition from which partition the transfer originates.

If the event log is partitioned, the delivery annotation MUST be added by the
event log node before delivery to consumers. 

A consumer MUST strip the annotation if it forwards the message onwards.

#### 4.6.5 event-streams-target-partition delivery annotation

The `event-streams-target-partition` delivery annotation is a `symbol` value and
describes the partition to which the transfer MUST be routed.

If the link is not partition-agnostic and if the link is not bound to the exact
same partition, the transfer MUST be rejected. If the partition does not exist,
the transfer MUST be rejected.

The event log MUST strip the annotation once it has evaluated it.

#### 4.6.6 event-streams-group-key message annotation

The `event-streams-group-key` message annotation is a `string` value and is a grouping
key that identifies events that are related and SHOULD therefore be treated as a
group for partitioning purposes.

This value differs from the AMQP core message property `group-id` in being an
annotation and therefore allowing overrides as messages get routed through
multiple partitioned intermediaries where partitioning concerns and therefore
the choice of grouping keys might vary.

When set by the producer and used over a partition-agnostic link, the value of
the annotation MAY be used by the event log node to bind the transfer to a
partition. If the key is used in this way, the event log SHOULD bind transfers
with the key to the same partition at all times and until the number of
partitions changes.

# 5 Stream delivery offsets and filters 

As stated in the introduction, event logs differ from queue-like structures in
that they only track message delivery state at the AMQP link level. While
attaching a `receive` AMQP link, the consumer MAY indicate a desired initial
offset into the retained log or some other condition based on which events
become eligible for delivery. The desired offset is expressed using an AMQP
filter expression.

## 5.1 Delivery annotations

The delivery filter expressions refer to a set of delivery annotations defined
in the following. 

For a conforming implementation, these delivery annotations MUST be added by the
event log node to all messages delivered to consumers.

### 5.1.1 event-streams-offset

The `event-streams-offset` delivery annotation property is a `symbol` expression
whose internal syntax is opaque to the receiver. Receivers MUST NOT interpret or
construct offset values. The offset value represents a relative position of
the event to the beginning of the log.

Even though the syntax is opaque, the chosen syntax MUST ensure that the
lexicographical order of the `event-streams-offset` of any event in the log MUST
be greater than the lexicographical order of any other event preceding it in the
order of the log.

Receivers learn about offset values either by obtaining the runtime information
of a partition, which contains the offset of the most recently added event, or
by retaining the value of the last `event-streams-offset` delivery annotation
property they read from the partition.

For use with [delivery filter expressions](#52-delivery-filters), the reserved
values MAY be used as constants for comparand values:

- "@earliest" is smaller than all existing offsets in the log.
- "@latest" is greater than all existing offsets in the log.

### 5.1.2 event-streams-timestamp

The `event-streams-timestamp` delivery annotation property is a timestamp
expression and reflects the absolute UTC instant when the event has been added
to the event log. This is different from the `creation-time` message property
that is set by the sender.

Multiple events added to the log around the same instant MAY have identical
timestamps due to the UTC clock resolution concerns. The timestamp only serves
as a filter criterion to determine a desired offset into the stream, but MUST
NOT be used to determine the order of events.

A distributed event log implementation where the ownership of a log changes
between different hosts and where clocks might not be fully synchronized MAY
record `event-streams-timestamp` values that reflect the existing clock skew,
meaning that some events that appear later in the log than a given event might
yet carry earlier UTC timestamps.

## 5.2 Delivery filters

A delivery filter specifies which events are eligible for delivery from the
event log. The delivery filter is provided as a source filter during link
attach.

Delivery filters MAY be expressed using any AMQP filter expression that is
supported by the source (the event log node). This specification defines two
simplified filters that allow for a conforming implementation without having to
implement the full [AMQP filter expressions](#filtex-v10) specification in a
conforming fashion.

The source filter MUST be evaluated against the retained events in the log from
earliest to latest. Events matching the source expression are eligible for
delivery.

### 5.2.1 event-streams-delivery-annotations filter

The `event-streams-delivery-annotations` filter type applies to AMQP
delivery annotations section (AMQP 3.2.2). The filter evaluates to true if all
annotations enclosed in the filter expression match the respective
delivery annotation map entries.

Only the [`event-streams-offset`](#511-event-streams-offset) and/or
[`event-streams-timestamp`](#512-event-streams-timestamp) delivery annotation
properties are eligible to be used with this filter.

The property values match the given values in the filter expression, if the
value of the property is greater than value given in the filter expression. If
the application remembered a particular offset after having consumed the message
that carried it, the filter matches messages added after that offset.

``` XML
<type name="event-streams-delivery-annotations-filter" class="restricted" source="amqp:map" provides="filter">
<descriptor name="amqp:event-streams-delivery-annotations-filter" code="0x00000000:0x00000200"/>
</type> 
```

The filter-type is âamqp:event-streams-delivery-annotations-filterâ, with
type-code 0x00000000:0x00000200

### 5.2.2 event-streams-sql filter 

The event streams SQL filter expression is a constrained subset of the SQL filter
expression defined in [AMQP filter expressions [FILTEX, 6]](#filtex-v10).

The grammar builds on the grammar defined for those SQL filters, but is
constrained as follows:

```
predicate ::=  <boolean_constant> |
              | <expression> <comparison-operator> <expression>
              | <predicate> <binary-logical-operator> <predicate>
expression ::= <constant> | <field_value>  
constant   ::= <string_constant> | <integer_constant>
field_value := <field>
field ::= <section> â.â<field_name>
section ::= { âdelivery_annotationsâ | âdâ }
```

This grammar subset allows for a minimal implementation that is limited to
evaluating the delivery annotation properties defined here while being
interoperable with the full SQL filter syntax.

Examples:

- Start from event at offset "a4c5" exclusively: `d.event-streams-offset > 'a4c5'`
- Start from event at offset "a4c5" inclusively: `d.event-streams-offset >= 'a4c5'`
- Start from event received after the timestamp: `d.event-streams-timestamp > 1585672841`


``` XML
 <type name="event-streams-sql-filter" class="restricted" source="sql-filter" provides="filter">
<descriptor name="amqp:event-streams-sql-filter" code="0x00000000:0x00000201"/> 
</type>
```

The filter-type is âamqp:event-streams-sql-filterâ, with type-code 0x00000000:0x00000201


-------

# 6 Runtime Information

Each event log node MUST implement a special, subordinate source address named
`$info` that allows producers and consumers to obtain information about the
configuration and state of the event log, most importantly the current number of
partitions and the offset boundaries for each partition.

If the container-relative source address of an event log node is "example", the
information source address MUST be "example/$info".

To obtain information from the information source, the producer or consumer
opens a receive link and flows at least one unit of link credit. The information
source responds with transferring a message that contains the desired
information in its `amqp-value` section. If multiple link credits are granted, the
information source MAY choose to put reasonable, application-defined temporal
separation between transfers.

The `amqp-value` section of the message contains an AMQP `map` at the top level.
The map has one reserved entry with the key `partitions`, all other entries MAY
be used for application specific extensions.

The `partitions` entry's value is a `list`, with one entry for each partition.
The list MUST carry an entry for the "main partition" if the log is
unpartitioned.

The entries in the partitions list are `map` objects and MUST contain the
following reserved entries for each partition; all other entries MAY
be used for application specific extensions.

|  Key            | Type    | Description
|-----------------|---------|------------------------------------------------------
| partition       | symbol  | The opaque identifier of the partition
| earliest-offset | symbol  | The earliest retained offset in the partition. MAY be null.
| latest-offset   | symbol  | The latest retained offset in the partition. MAY be null.


-------

# 7 Safety, Security, and Data Protection Considerations

[[TBD]]

-------

# 8 Conformance

[[TBD]]

-------

# Appendix A. Acknowledgments

(Note: A Work Product approved by the TC must include a list of people who
participated in the development of the Work Product. This is generally done by
collecting the list of names in this appendix. This list shall be initially
compiled by the Chair, and any Member of the TC may add or remove their names
from the list by request.  
Remove this note before submitting for publication.)

The following individuals have participated in the creation of this
specification and are gratefully acknowledged:

**AMQP TC Members:**

| First Name | Last Name | Company |
| :--------- | :-------- | :------ |
| TBD        | TBD       | TBD     |

-------

# Appendix B. Revision History
| Revision                | Date       | Editor          | Changes Made          |
| :---------------------- | :--------- | :-------------- | :-------------------- |
| event-streams-v1.0-wd01 | 2020-06-22 | Clemens Vasters | Initial working draft |

